---
layout: post
title:  "Lenovo Thinkpad x260 - thoughts after the first week"
date:   2016-06-25 00:00:01
categories: hardware thinkpad laptops
tags: thinkpad
---

A few weeks ago I bought an x260, and it just arrived this week. My x220 was actually still running
strong, but it was time to upgrade. I thought I'd put together some thoughts for anyone else
considering buying the x260.

Overall thoughts: I'm very happy with the purchase. There are some minor things that are slightly
annoying, but the good definitely outweighs the bad.

Likes:

* The screen - 1920x1080 is plenty good for me and what I do (predominantly programming and looking
  at plain text files). Though there are several laptops on the market now with better resolutions,
  namely the Dell XPS 13" and the Razer Blade Stealth.
* Battery life is mindblowing.
* Ubuntu Linux (16.04) works perfectly on it. No issues so far aside from some weirdness when
  docking and undocking whilst the computer is asleep.
* The touchpad is great. I still prefer the trackpoint whilst doing 'keyboard-intensive' tasks, but
  I find I'm actually using the touchpad quite a bit, now that it's no longer terrible.
* Simple, minimalist aesthetics. It's really nothing that fancy to look at. Some might consider this
  a "dislike", but personally I like it.
* Display device ports of the modern age - HDMI and DP.
* No MS/Windows stickers on the machine (though there's an intel one.)
* Build quality - solid, I expect nothing less from a ThinkPad.
* Externally accessible sim port - x220 had this hidden behind the battery which was annoying.

Things I miss (from the x220, t61p and older) and/or dislike:

* Whilst the keyboard is good, and has much better tactile feel versus other keyboards on the
  market, it's just not as good as the older ThinkPads. Perhaps it's just a case of familiarity. But
  there's a few things I'm not a big fan of here:
    * The 'insert' key is a meta-key. I copy and paste using ctrl+insert and shift+insert. This is a
      little awkward on this keyboard.
    * Dedicated hardware buttons for volume up/down and muting the mic are no longer available.
    * Page up/down are now near the up/down/left/right arrow
    * No more numpad! Prior models allowed you to hold down fn and have the right portion of the
      keyboard operate as a numpad.
    * No more dedicated function button to enable/disable touchpad. Note: I've worked around this
      using the ubuntu 'touchpad-indicator' application and using my own shortcut.
    * Hidden fn-keys that were a little hard to discover - e.g. fn+s for print-screen.
* LED indicators for bluetooth, wifi, sleep.
    * The trade-off is the simplicity of the design as mentioned above. But really there's plenty of
      blank space on that bezel.
* Hardware kill-switch for wireless communication. This is quite useful when travelling.
